docs/reference/sql-events/introduction.md, before:

# Introduction to the sql-events module

The Platformatic DB sql-events uses [mqemitter](http://npm.im/mqemitter) to publish events when [entities](/sql-mapper/entities/introduction.md) are saved and deleted.

## Install

You can use together with `@platformatic/sql-mapper`.

```
npm i @platformatic/sql-mapper @platformatic/sql-events
```

## Usage

```javascript
const { connect } = require('@platformatic/sql-mapper')
const { setupEmitter } = require('@platformatic/sql-events')
const { pino } = require('pino')

const log = pino()

async function onDatabaseLoad (db, sql) {
  await db.query(sql`CREATE TABLE pages (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
  );`)
}
const connectionString = 'postgres://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/postgres'
const mapper = await connect({
  connectionString,
  log,
  onDatabaseLoad,
  ignore: {},
  hooks: {
    Page: {
      find: async function(_find, opts) {
        console.log('hook called');
        return await _find(opts)
      }
    }
  }
})

setupEmitter({ mapper, log })

const pageEntity = mapper.entities.page

const queue = await mapper.subscribe([
  pageEntity.getSubscriptionTopic({ action: 'save' }),
  pageEntity.getSubscriptionTopic({ action: 'delete' })
])

const page = await pageEntity.save({
  input: { title: 'fourth page' }
})

const page2 = await pageEntity.save({
  input: {
    id: page.id,
    title: 'fifth page'
  }
})

await pageEntity.delete({
  where: {
    id: {
      eq: page.id
    }
  },
  fields: ['id', 'title']
})

for await (const ev of queue) {
  console.log(ev)
  if (expected.length === 0) {
    break
  }
}

process.exit(0)
```

### API

The `setupEmitter` function has the following options:

* `mq` - an instance of [`mqemitter`](https://npm.im/mqemitter), optional.

The `setupEmitter` functions adds the following properties to the `mapper` object:

- `mq` — an instance of [`mqemitter`](https://npm.im/mqemitter)
- `subscribe(topics)` — a method to create a node [`Readable`]() that will contain the events emitted by those topics. 

Each entities of `app.platformatic.entities` will be augmented with two functions:

* `entity.getPublishTopic({ ctx, data, action })` 
* `entity.getSubscriptionTopic({ ctx, action })`

Where `ctx` is the GraphQL Context, `data` is the object that will be emitted and `action` is either `save` or `delete`.

Commit message:

Add explanation on when to use sql-events
Signed-off-by: Matteo Collina <hello@matteocollina.com>

docs/reference/sql-events/introduction.md, after:

# Introduction to the sql-events module

The Platformatic DB sql-events uses [mqemitter](http://npm.im/mqemitter) to publish events when [entities](/sql-mapper/entities/introduction.md) are saved and deleted.

These events are useful to distribute updates to clients, e.g. via WebSocket, Server-Sent Events, or GraphQL Subscritions.
They are not the right choice for doing "event processing" within the same process, in that case
use [@platformatic/sql-mapper hooks](/sql-mapper/entities/hooks.md).

## Install

You can use together with `@platformatic/sql-mapper`.

```
npm i @platformatic/sql-mapper @platformatic/sql-events
```

## Usage

```javascript
const { connect } = require('@platformatic/sql-mapper')
const { setupEmitter } = require('@platformatic/sql-events')
const { pino } = require('pino')

const log = pino()

async function onDatabaseLoad (db, sql) {
  await db.query(sql`CREATE TABLE pages (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
  );`)
}
const connectionString = 'postgres://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/postgres'
const mapper = await connect({
  connectionString,
  log,
  onDatabaseLoad,
  ignore: {},
  hooks: {
    Page: {
      find: async function(_find, opts) {
        console.log('hook called');
        return await _find(opts)
      }
    }
  }
})

setupEmitter({ mapper, log })

const pageEntity = mapper.entities.page

const queue = await mapper.subscribe([
  pageEntity.getSubscriptionTopic({ action: 'save' }),
  pageEntity.getSubscriptionTopic({ action: 'delete' })
])

const page = await pageEntity.save({
  input: { title: 'fourth page' }
})

const page2 = await pageEntity.save({
  input: {
    id: page.id,
    title: 'fifth page'
  }
})

await pageEntity.delete({
  where: {
    id: {
      eq: page.id
    }
  },
  fields: ['id', 'title']
})

for await (const ev of queue) {
  console.log(ev)
  if (expected.length === 0) {
    break
  }
}

process.exit(0)
```

### API

The `setupEmitter` function has the following options:

* `mq` - an instance of [`mqemitter`](https://npm.im/mqemitter), optional.

The `setupEmitter` functions adds the following properties to the `mapper` object:

- `mq` — an instance of [`mqemitter`](https://npm.im/mqemitter)
- `subscribe(topics)` — a method to create a node [`Readable`]() that will contain the events emitted by those topics. 

Each entities of `app.platformatic.entities` will be augmented with two functions:

* `entity.getPublishTopic({ ctx, data, action })` 
* `entity.getSubscriptionTopic({ ctx, action })`

Where `ctx` is the GraphQL Context, `data` is the object that will be emitted and `action` is either `save` or `delete`.
