CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Platformatic

## Running and Developing DB

### Preparation

1. Clone this repository
2. Install pnpm `npm i pnpm --location=global`
3. Install dependencies for root project: `pnpm i` (if using `volta` run before `volta install pnpm`)
4. Install docker with Docker Desktop or [Colima](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima)

The CLI package is now available at **./node_modules/.bin/platformatic**. Use
`pnpm link` to use `platformatic` everywhere.
```sh
(cd packages/cli && pnpm link --global)
```

<a id='run-docker'></a>
### Start the RDBMS

We use Docker to start all the databases we develop against.

On Linux, execute: `docker compose up`

On Intel Macs: `docker compose -f docker-compose-mac.yml up` 

On Apple Silicon Macs: `docker compose -f docker-compose-apple-silicon.yml up` 

On Windows, execute: `docker-compose up --build`

### Start platformatic db

Read thorough documentation on the [quick start guide](https://github.com/platformatic/platformatic/blob/main/docs/getting-started/quick-start-guide.md), or
follow these steps to quickly create and start a platformatic db:

1. Create directories to work from `mkdir -p my-demo` then `cd my-demo`
2. Then create a package.json file with the default configs: `npm init --yes`
3. Create a migrations directory to store your database migration files: `mkdir migrations`
   Then create a new migration file named 001.do.sql in the migrations directory: `touch migrations/001.do.sql`
   Copy and paste this SQL query into the migration file:
   ```sql
   CREATE TABLE pages (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
   )
   ```
4. In your project directory, create a new Platformatic configuration file named platformatic.db.json: `touch platformatic.db.json`
   Copy and paste this configuration:
   ```json
   {
     "server": {
       "hostname": "127.0.0.1",
       "port": "3042"
     },
     "core": {
       "connectionString": "sqlite://./pages.db"
     },
     "migrations": {
       "dir": "./migrations",
       "autoApply": true
     }
   }
   ```
5. In your project directory, use the Platformatic CLI to start your API server: `platformatic db start`
6. Start interacting with the API by opening the following link on your browser http://127.0.0.1:3042/documentation/static/index.html or you can use curl
   to do it. Read the quick start guide to see examples.

### Run dashboard development server

Create a `./packages/db-dashboard/.env` file with the following content
```
VITE_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:3042
```
Or whatever port you are running platformatic DB server on. 

Use the command 
```sh
pnpm run dashboard:start
```

This will start a webpack server on port `3000` by default, with watcher and hot-reload (as a standard `create-react-app` application).

Note that GraphiQL will _not_ work because platformatic-db has not been started
yet.

### Run platformatic-db service

First build the dashboard for production with the command
```sh
pnpm run dashboard:build
```

This will create compressed files and assets under **packages/dashboard/build** directory.
To run the service:
```sh
platformatic db
```
This will load config from local directory (i.e using config file **platformatic.db.json**).

If you want to use another config file use the option `--config=/path/to/some.json`.

### Testing

1. [Run docker](#run-docker)
1. Run `pnpm run dashboard:build` 
1. Run tests: `pnpm test`

If you encounter issues running tests (f.e. failing tests without making a change to the codebase), try to:
1. Run `pnpm cleanall`
2. Run `pnpm store path` and remove the folder shown as an output
3. Run `pnpm install` again

__Before opening a pull request, please ensure that the tests are passing for the specific project you are working on.__

### Releasing

All platformatic modules share the same release number and are released
in a single process. In order to avoid internal breakages, dependencies as
part of this repository are using the `workspace:*` which will be replaced
by precise versions during publish by pnpm.

The procedure to release is simple:

1. Update the version of the root `package.json`
1. run `./scripts/sync-version.sh`
1. run `pnpm -r publish --access=public`

### Creating and merging a PR 
On the top of the PR description, if this is a fix of a github issue, add:
```
fixes #issuenum 
```
When all checks are passed and the changes are approved, merge the PR with `squash and merge` option

## Navigating the project via ctags

You can navigate the project using [universal ctags](https://github.com/universal-ctags/ctags). To generate a valid `tags` file use the following command:

```
ctags --exclude=node_modules --exclude='**/*.test.js' --exclude='**/build' -R *
```


## Developer Contribution of Origin

```
Developer Certificate of Origin
Version 1.1

Copyright (C) 2004, 2006 The Linux Foundation and its contributors.
1 Letterman Drive
Suite D4700
San Francisco, CA, 94129

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed.


Developer's Certificate of Origin 1.1

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I
    have the right to submit it under the open source license
    indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best
    of my knowledge, is covered under an appropriate open source
    license and I have the right under that license to submit that
    work with modifications, whether created in whole or in part
    by me, under the same open source license (unless I am
    permitted to submit under a different license), as indicated
    in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other
    person who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified
    it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution
    are public and that a record of the contribution (including all
    personal information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is
    maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with
    this project or the open source license(s) involved.
```

If you want to know how to retroactively add the DCO to your commits,
check out [this guide](https://github.com/src-d/guide/blob/master/developer-community/fix-DCO.md).

Commit message:

docs(contributing): Add troubleshooting guideline (#787)
* docs(contributing): Add troubleshooting guideline

Signed-off-by: Roberto Bianchi <roberto.bianchi@spendesk.com>

* Update docs

Signed-off-by: Roberto Bianchi <roberto.bianchi@spendesk.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: Roberto Bianchi <roberto.bianchi@spendesk.com>

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Platformatic

## Running and Developing DB

### Preparation

1. Clone this repository
2. Install pnpm `npm i pnpm --location=global` (if you're on Mac, you can use `brew` to install it with `brew install pnpm`)
3. Install dependencies for root project: `pnpm i`
4. Install docker with Docker Desktop or [Colima](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima)

The CLI package is now available at **./node_modules/.bin/platformatic**. Use
`pnpm link` to use `platformatic` everywhere.
```sh
(cd packages/cli && pnpm link --global)
```

#### Troubleshooting
If you encounter issues like [this one](https://github.com/platformatic/platformatic/issues/754):
```
Error: Cannot find module '/platformatic/node_modules/.pnpm/sqlite3@5.1.4/node_modules/sqlite3/lib/binding/napi-v6-darwin-unknown-arm64/node_sqlite3.node'
Require stack:
- /platformatic/node_modules/.pnpm/sqlite3@5.1.4/node_modules/sqlite3/lib/sqlite3-binding.js
- /platformatic/node_modules/.pnpm/sqlite3@5.1.4/node_modules/sqlite3/lib/sqlite3.js
- /platformatic/node_modules/.pnpm/@databases+sqlite@4.0.2/node_modules/@databases/sqlite/lib/index.js
- /platformatic/packages/sql-mapper/mapper.js
- /platformatic/packages/db-core/index.js
```

First of all, check that `pnpm` has NOT been installed with `volta`. If so, remove it and install it again with another method.

Remove the `node_modules` folder with `rm -fr ./node_modules`, then delete the pnpm cache with:
```
pnpm store prune

# Get the path of the pnpm store
pnpm store path

# Remove the pnpm store folder
rm -fr /path/from/the/above/command
```

Then install again all of the needed packages by running `pnpm i`.

<a id='run-docker'></a>
### Start the RDBMS

We use Docker to start all the databases we develop against.

On Linux, execute: `docker compose up`

On Intel Macs: `docker compose -f docker-compose-mac.yml up` 

On Apple Silicon Macs: `docker compose -f docker-compose-apple-silicon.yml up` 

On Windows, execute: `docker-compose up --build`

### Start platformatic db

Read thorough documentation on the [quick start guide](https://github.com/platformatic/platformatic/blob/main/docs/getting-started/quick-start-guide.md), or
follow these steps to quickly create and start a platformatic db:

1. Create directories to work from `mkdir -p my-demo` then `cd my-demo`
2. Then create a package.json file with the default configs: `npm init --yes`
3. Create a migrations directory to store your database migration files: `mkdir migrations`
   Then create a new migration file named 001.do.sql in the migrations directory: `touch migrations/001.do.sql`
   Copy and paste this SQL query into the migration file:
   ```sql
   CREATE TABLE pages (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
   )
   ```
4. In your project directory, create a new Platformatic configuration file named platformatic.db.json: `touch platformatic.db.json`
   Copy and paste this configuration:
   ```json
   {
     "server": {
       "hostname": "127.0.0.1",
       "port": "3042"
     },
     "core": {
       "connectionString": "sqlite://./pages.db"
     },
     "migrations": {
       "dir": "./migrations",
       "autoApply": true
     }
   }
   ```
5. In your project directory, use the Platformatic CLI to start your API server: `platformatic db start`
6. Start interacting with the API by opening the following link on your browser http://127.0.0.1:3042/documentation/static/index.html or you can use curl
   to do it. Read the quick start guide to see examples.

### Run dashboard development server

Create a `./packages/db-dashboard/.env` file with the following content
```
VITE_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:3042
```
Or whatever port you are running platformatic DB server on. 

Use the command 
```sh
pnpm run dashboard:start
```

This will start a webpack server on port `3000` by default, with watcher and hot-reload (as a standard `create-react-app` application).

Note that GraphiQL will _not_ work because platformatic-db has not been started
yet.

### Run platformatic-db service

First build the dashboard for production with the command
```sh
pnpm run dashboard:build
```

This will create compressed files and assets under **packages/dashboard/build** directory.
To run the service:
```sh
platformatic db
```
This will load config from local directory (i.e using config file **platformatic.db.json**).

If you want to use another config file use the option `--config=/path/to/some.json`.

### Testing

1. [Run docker](#run-docker)
1. Run `pnpm run dashboard:build` 
1. Run tests: `pnpm test`

If you encounter issues running tests (f.e. failing tests without making a change to the codebase), try to:
1. Run `pnpm cleanall`
2. Run `pnpm store path` and remove the folder shown as an output
3. Run `pnpm install` again

__Before opening a pull request, please ensure that the tests are passing for the specific project you are working on.__

### Releasing

All platformatic modules share the same release number and are released
in a single process. In order to avoid internal breakages, dependencies as
part of this repository are using the `workspace:*` which will be replaced
by precise versions during publish by pnpm.

The procedure to release is simple:

1. Update the version of the root `package.json`
1. run `./scripts/sync-version.sh`
1. run `pnpm -r publish --access=public`

### Creating and merging a PR 
On the top of the PR description, if this is a fix of a github issue, add:
```
fixes #issuenum 
```
When all checks are passed and the changes are approved, merge the PR with `squash and merge` option

## Navigating the project via ctags

You can navigate the project using [universal ctags](https://github.com/universal-ctags/ctags). To generate a valid `tags` file use the following command:

```
ctags --exclude=node_modules --exclude='**/*.test.js' --exclude='**/build' -R *
```


## Developer Contribution of Origin

```
Developer Certificate of Origin
Version 1.1

Copyright (C) 2004, 2006 The Linux Foundation and its contributors.
1 Letterman Drive
Suite D4700
San Francisco, CA, 94129

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed.


Developer's Certificate of Origin 1.1

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I
    have the right to submit it under the open source license
    indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best
    of my knowledge, is covered under an appropriate open source
    license and I have the right under that license to submit that
    work with modifications, whether created in whole or in part
    by me, under the same open source license (unless I am
    permitted to submit under a different license), as indicated
    in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other
    person who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified
    it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution
    are public and that a record of the contribution (including all
    personal information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is
    maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with
    this project or the open source license(s) involved.
```

If you want to know how to retroactively add the DCO to your commits,
check out [this guide](https://github.com/src-d/guide/blob/master/developer-community/fix-DCO.md).
