# Deployment

Applications built with Platformatic DB can be deployed to a hosting service
in the same way as any other Node.js application. This guide covers a few
things that will help smooth the path from development to production.

## Running a Platformatic DB application

### Make the Platformatic CLI available

To run a Platformatic DB application, the Platformatic CLI must be available
in the production environment. The most straightforward way of achieving this
is to [install it as a project dependency](/reference/cli.md#installation-and-usage).
This means that when `npm install` (or `npm ci`) is run as part of your
build/deployment process, the Platformatic CLI will be installed.

### Define an npm run script

A number of hosting services will automatically detect if your project's
`package.json` has a `start` npm run script. They will then execute the command
`npm start` to run your application in production.

You can add `platformatic db start` as the command for your project's `start`
npm run script, for example:

```json
{
   ...
  "scripts": {
    "start": "platformatic db start",
  },
}
```

## Server configuration

:::info

See the [Configuration](/reference/configuration.md) reference for all
configuration settings.

:::

### Configuration with environment variables

We recommend that you use [environment variable placeholders](/reference/configuration.md#environment-variable-placeholders)
in your Platformatic DB configuration. This will allow you to configure
different settings in your development and production environments.

In development you can set the  environment variables via a **`.env`** file
that will be automatically loaded by Platformatic DB. For example:

```
PORT=3042
PLT_SERVER_HOSTNAME=127.0.0.1
```

In production your hosting provider will typically provide their own mechanism
for setting environment variables.

### Configure the server port

Configure the port that the server will listen on by setting an environment
variable placeholder in your Platformatic DB configuration file:

```json title="platformatic.db.json"
{
  "server": {
    ...
    "port": "{PORT}"
  },
  ...
}
```

### Listen on all network interfaces

Most hosting providers require that you configure your server to bind to all
available network interfaces. To do this you must set the server hostname to
`0.0.0.0`.

This can be handled with an environment variable placeholder in your Platformatic
DB configuration file:

```json title="platformatic.db.json"
{
  "server": {
    ...
    "hostname": "{PLT_SERVER_HOSTNAME}",
  },
  ...
}
```

The environment variable `PLT_SERVER_HOSTNAME` should then be set to `0.0.0.0`
in your hosting environment.

### Security considerations

We recommend disabling the GraphiQL web UI in production. It can be disabled
with the following configuration:

```json title="platformatic.db.json"
{
  "core": {
    ...
    "graphql": {
      "graphiql": false
    }
  },
  ...
}
```

If you want to use this feature in development, replace the configuration
values with [environment variable placeholders](/reference/configuration.md#environment-variable-placeholders)
so you can set it to `true` in development and `false` in production.

## Databases

### Applying migrations

If you're running a single instance of your application in production, it's
best to allow Platformatic DB to automatically run migrations when the server
starts is. This reduces the chance of a currently running instance using a
database structure it doesn't understand while the new version is still being
deployed.

### SQLite

When using an SQLite database, you can ensure you don’t commit it to your Git
repository by adding the SQLite database filename to your `.gitignore` file.
The SQLite database file will be automatically generated by Platformatic DB
when your application migrations are run in production.
