docs/reference/db/dashboard.md, before:

# Platformatic DB Dashboard

The Platformatic DB has a dashboard used to do several actions like see the current configuration and access documentation for your generated API.

:::info

Be sure to set `dashboard: true` on your `platformatic.db.json`, as mentioned on the [config docs](/docs/reference/db/configuration/#dashboard).

:::

It also integrates GraphiQL, to run queries and mutations against Platformatic DB Server.

:::tip

As mentioned on the [config docs](/docs/reference/db/configuration#metrics), adding `metrics: true` will allow to add also the Platformatic metrics to the dashboard.

:::

## Development Server

If you want to contribute on the dashboard, it needs to know where is Platformatic DB Server.

Create a `./packages/db-dashboard/.env` file with the following content
```
VITE_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:3042
```

Or whatever port you are running platformatic DB server on. 

:::note

Please double check the host too: if platformatic is running on `127.0.0.1` and you set `localhost` as `VITE_SERVER_URL`, you'll get CORS errors.

:::

Then run 
```sh
pnpm run dashboard:start
```

You'll get vite's development server up and running.

## Build

Just run 
```sh
pnpm run dashboard:build
```

And `vite` will create a production ready bundle that will be served by Platformatic DB.

Commit message:

Setup Dashboard on custom endpoint (#664)
* Setup Dashboard on custom endpoint

Signed-off-by: Leonardo Rossi <leonardo.rossi@gmail.com>

* Fixes dashboard path also in React app

Signed-off-by: Leonardo Rossi <leonardo.rossi@gmail.com>

* linting

Signed-off-by: Leonardo Rossi <leonardo.rossi@gmail.com>

* Updates docs

Signed-off-by: Leonardo Rossi <leonardo.rossi@gmail.com>

* fixes script when dashboard does not have path

Signed-off-by: Leonardo Rossi <leonardo.rossi@gmail.com>

* handle when no config file is configured

Signed-off-by: Leonardo Rossi <leonardo.rossi@gmail.com>

* linting

Signed-off-by: Leonardo Rossi <leonardo.rossi@gmail.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: Leonardo Rossi <leonardo.rossi@gmail.com>

docs/reference/db/dashboard.md, after:

# Platformatic DB Dashboard

The Platformatic DB has a dashboard used to do several actions like see the current configuration and access documentation for your generated API.

:::info

Be sure to set `dashboard: true` on your `platformatic.db.json`, as mentioned on the [config docs](/docs/reference/db/configuration/#dashboard).

:::

It also integrates GraphiQL, to run queries and mutations against Platformatic DB Server.

:::tip

As mentioned on the [config docs](/docs/reference/db/configuration#metrics), adding `metrics: true` will allow to add also the Platformatic metrics to the dashboard.

:::

## Development Server

If you want to contribute on the dashboard, it needs to know where is Platformatic DB Server.

Create a `./packages/db-dashboard/.env` file with the following content
```
VITE_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:3042
```

If you set up Platformatic DB with a custom path for dashboard (found in `dashboard.path` config value), you have to add
```
VITE_DASHBOARD_PATH=/your-custom-endpoint
```

Note that this value is configured automatically by the script in `scripts/fix-dashboard-env.js` that is executed before `dashboard:build`.

Or whatever port you are running platformatic DB server on. 

:::note

Please double check the host too: if platformatic is running on `127.0.0.1` and you set `localhost` as `VITE_SERVER_URL`, you'll get CORS errors.

:::

Then run 
```sh
pnpm run dashboard:start
```

You'll get vite's development server up and running.

## Build

Just run 
```sh
pnpm run dashboard:build
```

And `vite` will create a production ready bundle that will be served by Platformatic DB.
