docs/reference/db/plugin.md, before:

# Plugin

If you want to extend Platformatic DB features, it is possible to register a plugin, which will be in the form of a standard [Fastify](https://fastify.io) plugin.

The config file will specify where the plugin file is located as the example below:

```json
{
  ...
  "plugins": {
    "paths": ["./plugin/index.js"]
  }
}
```
The paths are relative to the config file path.

Since it uses [fastify-sandbox](https://github.com/mcollina/fastify-sandbox) under the hood, all other options of that package may be specified under the `plugin` property.

Once the config file is set up, you can write your plugin to extend Platformatic DB API or write your custom business logic.

You should export an async `function` which receives a parameters
- `app` (`FastifyInstance`) that is the main fastify [instance](https://www.fastify.io/docs/latest/Reference/Server/#instance) running Platformatic DB
- `opts` all the options specified in the config file after `path`
-
You can always access Platformatic [data mapper](/reference/sql-mapper/introduction.md) through `app.platformatic` property.

Check some [examples](/guides/add-custom-functionality/introduction.md).

## Hot Reload

Plugin file is being watched by [`fs.watch`](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fspromiseswatchfilename-options) function.

You don't need to reload Platformatic DB server while working on your plugin. Every time you save, the watcher will trigger a reload event and the server will auto-restart and load your updated code.

:::tip

At this time, on Linux, file watch in subdirectories is not supported due to a Node.js limitation (documented [here](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#caveats)).

:::

## Directories

The path can also be a directory. In that case, the directory will be loaded with [`@fastify/autoload`](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-autoload).

Consider the following directory structure:

```
├── routes
│   ├── foo
│   │   ├── something.js
│   │   └── bar
│   │       └── baz.js
│   ├── single-plugin
│   │   └── utils.js
│   └── another-plugin.js
└── platformatic.service.json
```

By default the folder will be added as a prefix to all the routes defined within them.
See the autoload documentation for all the options to customize this behavior.

## Multiple plugins

Multiple plugins can be loaded in parallel by specifying an array:

```json
{
  ...
  "plugins": {
    "paths": [{
      "path": "./plugin/index.js"
    }, {
      "path": "./routes/"
    }]
  }
}
```

Commit message:

add context injection for entities on plugins docs
Signed-off-by: Luiz Ribeiro <ltrindaderibeiro@gmail.com>

docs/reference/db/plugin.md, after:

# Plugin

If you want to extend Platformatic DB features, it is possible to register a plugin, which will be in the form of a standard [Fastify](https://fastify.io) plugin.

The config file will specify where the plugin file is located as the example below:

```json
{
  ...
  "plugins": {
    "paths": ["./plugin/index.js"]
  }
}
```
The paths are relative to the config file path.

Since it uses [fastify-sandbox](https://github.com/mcollina/fastify-sandbox) under the hood, all other options of that package may be specified under the `plugin` property.

Once the config file is set up, you can write your plugin to extend Platformatic DB API or write your custom business logic.

You should export an async `function` which receives a parameters
- `app` (`FastifyInstance`) that is the main fastify [instance](https://www.fastify.io/docs/latest/Reference/Server/#instance) running Platformatic DB
- `opts` all the options specified in the config file after `path`
-
You can always access Platformatic [data mapper](/reference/sql-mapper/introduction.md) through `app.platformatic` property.

:::info
To make sure that a user has the appropriate set of permissions to perform any action on an entity the `context` should be passed to the `entity mapper` operation like this:

```js
app.post('/', async (req, reply) => {
  const ctx = req.createPlatformaticCtx()
  
  await app.platformatic.entities.movies.find({
    where: { /*...*/ },
    ctx
  })
})
```
:::

Check some [examples](/guides/add-custom-functionality/introduction.md).

## Hot Reload

Plugin file is being watched by [`fs.watch`](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fspromiseswatchfilename-options) function.

You don't need to reload Platformatic DB server while working on your plugin. Every time you save, the watcher will trigger a reload event and the server will auto-restart and load your updated code.

:::tip

At this time, on Linux, file watch in subdirectories is not supported due to a Node.js limitation (documented [here](https://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#caveats)).

:::

## Directories

The path can also be a directory. In that case, the directory will be loaded with [`@fastify/autoload`](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-autoload).

Consider the following directory structure:

```
├── routes
│   ├── foo
│   │   ├── something.js
│   │   └── bar
│   │       └── baz.js
│   ├── single-plugin
│   │   └── utils.js
│   └── another-plugin.js
└── platformatic.service.json
```

By default the folder will be added as a prefix to all the routes defined within them.
See the autoload documentation for all the options to customize this behavior.

## Multiple plugins

Multiple plugins can be loaded in parallel by specifying an array:

```json
{
  ...
  "plugins": {
    "paths": [{
      "path": "./plugin/index.js"
    }, {
      "path": "./routes/"
    }]
  }
}
```
