docs/getting-started/quick-start-guide.md, before:

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Quick Start Guide

In this guide you'll learn how to create and run your first API with
[Platformatic DB](/docs/reference/db/introduction.md). Let's get started!

:::info

This guide uses [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/) for the database, but
Platformatic DB also supports [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/),
[MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/) and [MariaDB](https://mariadb.org/) databases.

:::

## Prerequisites

Platformatic supports macOS, Linux and Windows ([WSL](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/wsl/) recommended).

To follow along with this guide you'll need to have these things installed:

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) >= v16.17.0 or >= v18.8.0
- [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/) v7 or later
- A code editor, for example [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)

## Create a new API project

### Automatic CLI

Run this command in your terminal to start the Platformatic creator wizard:

<Tabs groupId="package-manager-create">
<TabItem value="npm" label="npm">

```bash
npm create platformatic@latest
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="yarn" label="yarn">

```bash
yarn create platformatic
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="pnpm" label="pnpm">

```bash
pnpm create platformatic@latest
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

This interactive command-line tool will ask you some questions about how you'd
like to set up your new Platformatic project. For this guide, select these options:

```
- Which kind of project do you want to create?  => DB
- Where would you like to create your project?  => quick-start 
- Do you want to create default migrations?     => Yes
- Do you want to create a plugin?               => Yes
- Do you want to use TypeScript?                => No
- Do you want to install dependencies?          => Yes (this can take a while)
- Do you want to apply the migrations?          => Yes
- Do you want to create the GitHub action to deploy this application to Platformatic Cloud? => No
```

Once the wizard is complete, you'll have a Platformatic app project in the
folder `quick-start`, with example migration files and a plugin script.

:::info

Make sure you run the npm/yarn/pnpm command `install` command manually if you
don't ask the wizard to do it for you.

:::

#### Start your API server

In your project directory, run this command to start your API server:

```bash
npm start 
```

Your Platformatic API is now up and running! 🌟

This command will:

- Automatically map your SQL database to REST and GraphQL API interfaces.
- Start the Platformatic API server.

You can jump down to [Next steps](#next-steps) or read on to learn more about
the project files that the wizard has created for you.

#### Check the database schema

In your project directory (`quick-start`), open the `migrations` directory that can store your database migration files that will contain both the `001.do.sql` and `001.undo.sql` files. The `001.do.sql` file contains the SQL statements to create the database objects, while the `001.undo.sql` file contains the SQL statements to drop them.

```sql title="migrations/001.do.sql"
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS movies (
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
  title TEXT NOT NULL
);
```

Note that this migration has been already applied by Platformatic creator.

#### Check your API configuration

In your project directory, check the Platformatic configuration file named
**`platformatic.db.json`** and the environment file named **`.env`**:

The created configuration tells Platformatic to:

- Run an API server on `http://127.0.0.1:3042/`
- Connect to an SQLite database stored in a file named `db.sqlite`
- Look for database migration files in the `migrations` directory
- Load the plugin file named `plugin.js` and automatically generate types

:::tip

The [Configuration reference](/docs/reference/db/configuration.md) explains all of the
supported configuration options.

:::

### Manual setup

Create a directory for your new API project:

```bash
mkdir quick-start

cd quick-start
```

Then create a `package.json` file and install the [platformatic](https://www.npmjs.com/package/platformatic)
CLI as a project dependency:

<Tabs groupId="package-manager">
<TabItem value="npm" label="npm">

```bash
npm init --yes

npm install platformatic
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="yarn" label="yarn">

```bash
yarn init --yes

yarn add platformatic
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="pnpm" label="pnpm">

```bash
pnpm init

pnpm add platformatic
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Add a database schema

In your project directory (`quick-start`), create a `migrations` directory to
store your database migration files:

```bash
mkdir migrations
```

Then create a new migration file named **`001.do.sql`** in the **`migrations`**
directory.

Copy and paste this SQL query into the migration file:

```sql title="migrations/001.do.sql"
CREATE TABLE movies (
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
  title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);
```

When it's run by Platformatic, this query will create a new database table
named `movies`.

:::tip

You can check syntax for SQL queries on the [Database.Guide SQL Reference](https://database.guide/sql-reference-for-beginners/).

:::

#### Configure your API

In your project directory, create a new Platformatic configuration file named
**`platformatic.db.json`**.

Copy and paste in this configuration:

```json title="platformatic.db.json"
{
  "server": {
    "hostname": "127.0.0.1",
    "port": "3042"
  },
  "core": {
    "connectionString": "sqlite://./db.sqlite"
  },
  "migrations": {
    "dir": "./migrations"
  }
}
```

This configuration tells Platformatic to:

- Run an API server on `http://127.0.0.1:3042/`
- Connect to an SQLite database stored in a file named `db.sqlite`
- Look for database migration files in the `migrations` directory

:::tip

The [Configuration reference](/docs/reference/db/configuration.md) explains all of the
supported configuration options.

:::

#### Start your API server

In your project directory, use the Platformatic CLI to start your API server:

```bash
npx platformatic db start
```

This will:

- Automatically map your SQL database to REST and GraphQL API interfaces.
- Start the Platformatic API server.

Your Platformatic API is now up and running! 🌟

## Next steps

### Use the REST API interface

You can use cURL to make requests to the REST interface of your API, for example:

#### Create a new movie

```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d "{ \"title\": \"Hello Platformatic DB\" }" \
	http://localhost:3042/movies
```

You should receive a response from your API like this:

```json
{"id":1,"title":"Hello Platformatic DB"}
```

#### Get all movies

```bash
curl http://localhost:3042/movies
```

You should receive a response from your API like this, with an array
containing all the movies in your database:

```json
[{"id":1,"title":"Hello Platformatic DB"}]
```

:::tip

Take a look at the [REST API reference](/docs/reference/sql-openapi/introduction.md) for an
overview of the REST interface that the API provides.

:::

#### Swagger OpenAPI documentation

You can explore the OpenAPI documentation for your REST API in the Swagger UI at
[http://localhost:3042/documentation](http://localhost:3042/documentation)

### Use the GraphQL API interface

Open [http://localhost:3042/graphiql](http://localhost:3042/graphiql) in your
web browser to explore the GraphQL interface of your API.

Try out this GraphQL query to retrieve all movies from your API:

```graphql
query {
  movies {
    id
    title
  }
}
```

:::tip

Learn more about your API's GraphQL interface in the
[GraphQL API reference](/docs/reference/sql-graphql/introduction.md).

:::

Commit message:

fix: add instruction to run migrations in manual setup

docs/getting-started/quick-start-guide.md, after:

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Quick Start Guide

In this guide you'll learn how to create and run your first API with
[Platformatic DB](/docs/reference/db/introduction.md). Let's get started!

:::info

This guide uses [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org/) for the database, but
Platformatic DB also supports [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/),
[MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/) and [MariaDB](https://mariadb.org/) databases.

:::

## Prerequisites

Platformatic supports macOS, Linux and Windows ([WSL](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/wsl/) recommended).

To follow along with this guide you'll need to have these things installed:

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) >= v16.17.0 or >= v18.8.0
- [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/) v7 or later
- A code editor, for example [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)

## Create a new API project

### Automatic CLI

Run this command in your terminal to start the Platformatic creator wizard:

<Tabs groupId="package-manager-create">
<TabItem value="npm" label="npm">

```bash
npm create platformatic@latest
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="yarn" label="yarn">

```bash
yarn create platformatic
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="pnpm" label="pnpm">

```bash
pnpm create platformatic@latest
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

This interactive command-line tool will ask you some questions about how you'd
like to set up your new Platformatic project. For this guide, select these options:

```
- Which kind of project do you want to create?  => DB
- Where would you like to create your project?  => quick-start 
- Do you want to create default migrations?     => Yes
- Do you want to create a plugin?               => Yes
- Do you want to use TypeScript?                => No
- Do you want to install dependencies?          => Yes (this can take a while)
- Do you want to apply the migrations?          => Yes
- Do you want to create the GitHub action to deploy this application to Platformatic Cloud? => No
```

Once the wizard is complete, you'll have a Platformatic app project in the
folder `quick-start`, with example migration files and a plugin script.

:::info

Make sure you run the npm/yarn/pnpm command `install` command manually if you
don't ask the wizard to do it for you.

:::

#### Start your API server

In your project directory, run this command to start your API server:

```bash
npm start 
```

Your Platformatic API is now up and running! 🌟

This command will:

- Automatically map your SQL database to REST and GraphQL API interfaces.
- Start the Platformatic API server.

You can jump down to [Next steps](#next-steps) or read on to learn more about
the project files that the wizard has created for you.

#### Check the database schema

In your project directory (`quick-start`), open the `migrations` directory that can store your database migration files that will contain both the `001.do.sql` and `001.undo.sql` files. The `001.do.sql` file contains the SQL statements to create the database objects, while the `001.undo.sql` file contains the SQL statements to drop them.

```sql title="migrations/001.do.sql"
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS movies (
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
  title TEXT NOT NULL
);
```

Note that this migration has been already applied by Platformatic creator.

#### Check your API configuration

In your project directory, check the Platformatic configuration file named
**`platformatic.db.json`** and the environment file named **`.env`**:

The created configuration tells Platformatic to:

- Run an API server on `http://127.0.0.1:3042/`
- Connect to an SQLite database stored in a file named `db.sqlite`
- Look for database migration files in the `migrations` directory
- Load the plugin file named `plugin.js` and automatically generate types

:::tip

The [Configuration reference](/docs/reference/db/configuration.md) explains all of the
supported configuration options.

:::

### Manual setup

Create a directory for your new API project:

```bash
mkdir quick-start

cd quick-start
```

Then create a `package.json` file and install the [platformatic](https://www.npmjs.com/package/platformatic)
CLI as a project dependency:

<Tabs groupId="package-manager">
<TabItem value="npm" label="npm">

```bash
npm init --yes

npm install platformatic
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="yarn" label="yarn">

```bash
yarn init --yes

yarn add platformatic
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="pnpm" label="pnpm">

```bash
pnpm init

pnpm add platformatic
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Add a database schema

In your project directory (`quick-start`), create a `migrations` directory to
store your database migration files:

```bash
mkdir migrations
```

Then create a new migration file named **`001.do.sql`** in the **`migrations`**
directory.

Copy and paste this SQL query into the migration file:

```sql title="migrations/001.do.sql"
CREATE TABLE movies (
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
  title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);
```

When it's run by Platformatic, this query will create a new database table
named `movies`.

:::tip

You can check syntax for SQL queries on the [Database.Guide SQL Reference](https://database.guide/sql-reference-for-beginners/).

:::

#### Configure your API

In your project directory, create a new Platformatic configuration file named
**`platformatic.db.json`**.

Copy and paste in this configuration:

```json title="platformatic.db.json"
{
  "server": {
    "hostname": "127.0.0.1",
    "port": "3042"
  },
  "core": {
    "connectionString": "sqlite://./db.sqlite"
  },
  "migrations": {
    "dir": "./migrations"
  }
}
```

This configuration tells Platformatic to:

- Run an API server on `http://127.0.0.1:3042/`
- Connect to an SQLite database stored in a file named `db.sqlite`
- Look for database migration files in the `migrations` directory

:::tip

The [Configuration reference](/docs/reference/db/configuration.md) explains all of the
supported configuration options.

:::

#### Apply your migrations

In your project directory, use the Platformatic CLI to apply migrations:

```bash
npx platformatic db migrations apply
```

#### Start your API server

In your project directory, use the Platformatic CLI to start your API server:

```bash
npx platformatic db start
```

This will:

- Automatically map your SQL database to REST and GraphQL API interfaces.
- Start the Platformatic API server.

Your Platformatic API is now up and running! 🌟

## Next steps

### Use the REST API interface

You can use cURL to make requests to the REST interface of your API, for example:

#### Create a new movie

```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d "{ \"title\": \"Hello Platformatic DB\" }" \
	http://localhost:3042/movies
```

You should receive a response from your API like this:

```json
{"id":1,"title":"Hello Platformatic DB"}
```

#### Get all movies

```bash
curl http://localhost:3042/movies
```

You should receive a response from your API like this, with an array
containing all the movies in your database:

```json
[{"id":1,"title":"Hello Platformatic DB"}]
```

:::tip

Take a look at the [REST API reference](/docs/reference/sql-openapi/introduction.md) for an
overview of the REST interface that the API provides.

:::

#### Swagger OpenAPI documentation

You can explore the OpenAPI documentation for your REST API in the Swagger UI at
[http://localhost:3042/documentation](http://localhost:3042/documentation)

### Use the GraphQL API interface

Open [http://localhost:3042/graphiql](http://localhost:3042/graphiql) in your
web browser to explore the GraphQL interface of your API.

Try out this GraphQL query to retrieve all movies from your API:

```graphql
query {
  movies {
    id
    title
  }
}
```

:::tip

Learn more about your API's GraphQL interface in the
[GraphQL API reference](/docs/reference/sql-graphql/introduction.md).

:::
